PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
By Jane Austen
(Public Domain — Chapters 1–4, lightly excerpted for demo purposes)

NOTE: This excerpt contains one intentionally inserted continuity error
(a change in Elizabeth Bennet's eye colour) for testing the continuity
checker tool. All other text is unaltered from the original public-domain
novel.

CHAPTER 1

It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession
of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.

However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his
first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds
of the surrounding families, that he is considered the rightful property
of some one or other of their daughters.

"My dear Mr. Bennet," said his lady to him one day, "have you heard that
Netherfield Park is let at last?"

Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.

"But it is," returned she; "for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she
told me all about it."

Mr. Bennet made no answer.

"Do not you want to know who has taken it?" cried his wife impatiently.

"You want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it."

This was invitation enough.

"Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken
by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came
down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much
delighted with it, that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he
is to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are
to be in the house by the end of next week."

"What is his name?"

"Bingley."

"Is he married or single?"

"Oh! Single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four
or five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!"

"How so? How can it affect them?"

"My dear Mr. Bennet," replied his wife, "how can you be so tiresome!
You must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them."

"Is that his design in settling here?"

"Design! Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he
may fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as
soon as he comes."

Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley.
He had always intended to visit him, though to the last always
assuring his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after
the visit was paid, she had no knowledge of it.

CHAPTER 2

Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,
reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had
been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. Her mind
was less difficult to develop. She was a woman of mean understanding,
little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented she
fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her
daughters married; its solace was visiting and news.

"I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy."

"We are not in a way to know what Mr. Bingley likes," said her mother
resentfully, "since we are not to visit."

"But you forget, mamma," said Elizabeth, "that we shall meet him at the
assemblies, and that Mrs. Long promised to introduce him."

Elizabeth Bennet had listened with a smile in her dark, expressive
eyes, for she found more amusement in her father's odd manner than in
the family's endless talk of Mr. Bingley's fortune.

"I do not think Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces of
her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion of
her."

"No more have I," said Mr. Bennet; "and I am glad to find that you do
not depend on her serving you."

CHAPTER 3

Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five
daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her
husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him
in various ways, with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and
distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all.

At length it was settled that Mr. Bingley should be introduced to the
neighbourhood at the next assembly ball, and the whole family looked
forward to the evening with impatience.

When the party entered the assembly room it consisted of only five
altogether: Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest,
and another young man.

Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasant
countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sister, Mrs. Hurst, was
a fine woman, but her look and address were much admired; but his
friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention of the room by his fine, tall
person, handsome features, noble mien, and the report which was
in general circulation within five minutes after his entrance, of his
having ten thousand a year.

Elizabeth Bennet raised her blue eyes to observe him more closely, and
was struck by his proud, forbidding air, which turned the tide of his
popularity; for he was discovered to be proud, to be above his company,
and above being pleased.

Mr. Darcy danced only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley,
declined being introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the
evening in walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his
own party.

CHAPTER 4

When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious
in her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister just how
very much she admired him.

"He is just what a young man ought to be," said she, "sensible,
good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners! So much ease,
with such perfect good breeding!"

"He is also handsome," replied Elizabeth, "which a young man ought
likewise to be, if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete."

"I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I
did not expect such a compliment."

"Did not you? I did for you. But that is one great difference between
us. Compliments always take you by surprise, and me never. What could
be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help seeing
that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in the
room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is very
agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a
stupider person."

"Dear Lizzy!"

"Oh! You are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.
You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable
in your eyes."

"I would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak
what I think."

"I know you do; and it is that which makes the wonder. With your good
sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of others!
Affectation of candour is common enough; but candour without
ostentation is your own."

END OF EXCERPT
